    Title: Chapter 12: The Timeless Way of Investing in Programming Languages
    Date: 2020-08-31T20:28:35
    Tags: DRAFT, Tools, Programming Language, Long Run, Long Term, Investment, Strategy, In The Large, Principles, Time Preference

My friend Beth and I often disagree on software technology,
and our arguments delight our common friend Ngnghm the anthropologist
(we pronounce her name "Ann").
In return, we often ask Ann how things are done amongst
[Houyhnhnms](http://ngnghm.github.io/blog/2015/08/02/chapter-1-the-way-houyhnhnms-compute/)
(which we pronounce "Hunams").
[Lately](http://ngnghm.github.io/blog/2020/08/10/chapter-11-a-work-horse-and-its-tools/),
we had been arguing about choices of programming languages;
we noticed that humans tended to make short-term picks, with no long-term strategy.
The question then was: what would a long-term strategy look like?
How did Hunams differ from Humans regarding their approach to the issue?
Probably due to my bias in translation, the way the answer came out was in term of *investment*.

<!-- more -->

### Short-term vs long-term language criteria

Whether you evaluate language ecosystems for the short-term, the long-term or anything in between,
has implications on how much weight you will or won't give to various aspects of these ecosystems.
At the extremes, John D. Cook has this polynomial metaphor:
["For the short term, focus on the largest coefficient. For the long term, focus on the largest exponent."](https://twitter.com/AnalysisFact/status/708011191885496320)

The short term costs and benefits of a language involve the distance
between what the ecosystem immediately provides and what the short-term needs of the programmer are.
- What evaluators are readily available? How feature-complete are they? How robust? How well-documented?
  Do they support all the intended target platforms?
  Are they interpreters slowly executing code, or compilers producing fast executables?
  How slowly does the runtime start or does compiler transform programs?
- What libraries are readily available? How feature-complete are they? How robust? How well-documented?
  How well do they cover the domains considered for the task at hand?
- How good is the tooling: compiler optimizations, type-checkers, error messages, editor integration,
  re-formatters, debuggers, linkers, foreign-function interfaces, etc.?
- How vibrant is the community? Are new libraries written, issues fixed, questions answered?
  Is there a large enough a pool of talent from which to readily hire?
- How big or small are the barriers to entry?
  How much intrinsic or incidental complexity are involved in the language's concepts?
  How familiar are the language's syntax and semantics?
  How much amount of boilerplate is required to start writing and testing an application?

Instead, the long term costs and benefits of a language involve very different criteria,
that capture the possibility and difficulties of building and maintaining over time
large code bases with ever more varied and sophisticated features.
- How conducive is the language to writing good quality code?
  Is it easier, more natural and less verbose to write safe and obviously correct code
  or to write unobvious and probably subtly unsafe code?
  How well-defined is the meaning of programs in the language?
  Is the semantics of a program clear at all times to trained practitioners, or
  are there pitfalls and landmines all over the place?
  Is the language core based on a relatively small number of well-defined concepts,
  or is it a based on a large haphazard collection of clunky features that are hard to conceptualize?
- How well does the language deal with division of labor?
  Is there a good module system that enables programmers
  to build programs incrementally in small fragments
  on which they can reason locally along neat interfaces?
  Or do the language's abstractions leak all over the place?
  Is it even possible to express syntactic abstractions at compile-time?
  reflective control abstractions at runtime?
- How well does the language evolve over time?
  Is it easy for programmers to define new extensions themselves, or
  do they have to wait for a blessed few members of a Central Committee to get anything done?
  How active is this Central Committee, and how long will it remain active?
  Are the people in control willing delegate to competent people the parts of the design
  about which they are not personally competent, or do they insist on doing a bad job by themselves?
  Which parts can or cannot, do or don't, evolve without the need for central control?
  How aligned with yours are the interests of this Committee?
- Where is the language in its life cycle?
  How long has it existed?
  What is its track record so far and what can we expect from it in the future?
  Has it easily embraced the features that have become important over time?
  Has it been able to shed bad choices from the past
  as better choices became more available or more obvious?
  Has it been able to maintain backward compatibility or a seamless evolution path
  for its users as it evolved?
  Is the community generally competent or incompetent? welcoming or unwelcoming?
  growing or shrinking? getting younger or older?
  improving or degenerating? open to criticism or fanatical?

*From an economic point of view,
in the short term, a language ecosystem is a commodity of which you are merely a consumer.
But in the long run, it is some sunk capital the choice of which polarizes your career,
of which you are a producer as well as a consumer.*

### Circumstantial vs Perennial

Short-term costs and benefits are emminently circumstantial:
what exactly are you trying to do, and is there a library
that precisely does most of the task at hand?
are you personally familiar with the language and its ecosystem?
how about other people in your team, or potential hires?
Given an immediate programming goal, there is usually no time or budget
to acquire new skills or to write and debug large libraries.
Beyond your individual circumstances, the current state of the market shapes
what you can do and afford. With a short-term horizon, you have to make do
with what technologies are readily available, and what pool of potential hires you can afford.

Now, the very circumstantial nature of the issue makes it hard to share or reuse information
across projects and across time in discussing what choices each person has to make.
Whatever general principles one might want to invoke or discover
will be secondary compared to the particulars of the situation.
The information is too specific to each person's choice at hand.
There are potentially infinite relevant possibilities and tradeoffs to discuss in each case,
yet only finitely much time to discuss them,
and in the end the decision will involve subjective judgment calls
made with necessarily very partial knowledge.

By contrast, none of the above criteria, and none of the above circumstances matter much
when choosing a language for the long run:
in the long term, all the short-term issues can be addressed at a small fraction
of the overall cost of building and maintaining the software.
Whether in a business, a charity, or an academic career,
over many decades you can afford to pick up the extra skills,
to write the missing software and documentation, to grow the community,
and even to evolve the language itself.
And you can't afford to save a language and its shrinking community
against their inability to face challenges and adapt to the world.
To build lasting software, you need to focus on perennial issues.

Thus, in the long run, you'll save a considerable amount of time and energy
using a well-architected language that supports simple, well-defined and modular code,
and that furthermore can itself evolve,
compared to using a misdesigned language that introduces
complexity, ambiguity and global interferences,
and that moreover cannot evolve to address its issues.

*Economically speaking, you can earn compound interests by investing in a language ecosystem.
In the long run, the earnings dominate any fixed benefits from choosing a language,
and the rate of these earnings is the decisive factor as to which language is best,
though circumstantial factors might be overwhelming in the short to middle term.*

Interestingly, since there are lots of details but no universal principles
to circumstantial short-term decisions,
there will be a forever fount of quickly forgotten discussions and articles about these details.
On the other hands, since there are many principles but no details to perennial long-term decisions,
there will be only so many actually original or useful discussions and articles about those principles.
This essay strives to be among them.

### Language Portfolio

Either as an individual or as a company,
you can make productive use of multiple programming languages.
Why not “just” use the best language for every task at hand,
amongst hundreds of possible languages, on a case-by-case basis,
maybe even each made as a short-term decision for a short-term project?
Because there are high transaction costs involved in choosing a language,
in changing your practice from one to another, and
in bridging the gap between what an ecosystem provides and what you actually need or are used to.

Gains from growing an ecosystem are cumulative, but only if you stay within the ecosystem.
These gains compound, but only inasmuch as the improvements made using the ecosystem
can be and are applied to improving the ecosystem itself.
Thus, the rate of compounding depends on how effective are the ecosystem's *reflection* principles
that enable metaprogramming within the ecosystem;
but this rate also depends on how much you keep investing in such compounding on the platform,
as opposed to diluting the compounded efforts between multiple redundant platforms
while wasting a good deal of capital on transaction costs from switching.

Thus, you can only afford to master so many languages at once.
You can only memorize how to use so many ecosystems.
What more, every time you switch to another ecosystem,
you lose the improvements you made to the previous ones, the expertise,
the fitness to purpose, the ecosystem-specific capital your sunk into them.

The reasonable solution is that you should stick to a single language,
or portofolio of complementary languages,
presumably centered around a main language plus complements where that language is lacking.
This language alone, or main language synergistically together with its complements,
will cover the spectrum of the software you write —
and be the best language or portfolio you can muster for the purpose
to write all your current and future intended tasks.
Then you will actually write all these tasks in that or those languages.
Whenever your portfolio is found lacking, it should be costlier to switch language or portfolio
than to extend it by reimplementing the missing or unsatisfactory features
in your language or portfolio languages.

### Portfolio Success and Failure

Portfolio success is when you pick your language, and thereafter
all your code should be in your language of choice (and its chosen complements),
with only trivial functionality wrappers and a few performance-critical loops
in any other language, plus maybe some code to adapt your IDE to your language and style.

Every “script”, “utility” or “plugin” needed to build your system or hold it together,
in any language except one of your portfolio languages, is a failure.
Of course, you might choose to include one “scripting” language in your portfolio:
bash, zsh, python, perl, ruby, etc., and stick to it for your scripting needs.
But if you sincerely do, then you must be evolving and maintaining large programs
in those scripting languages, evolving their ecosystem, and playing
the long run compound interest game with them.
In particular you should have a good story for modularity in those languages,
typing, debugging, or whatever technique is required for serious long term development
of large codebases in such languages. Or else, you’re only lying to yourself and others
that you included these languages in your portfolio, or you’re failing to properly
invest in them and earn any dividends.
Odds are, they’re actually as much technical debt for you
as for everyone else who uses these misdesigned underpowered languages
that are technically and socially impossible to improve,
for which you pay high interest rates.

Similarly, anything more than a performance-critical loop
in C, C++, Java, Assembly or PL/SQL is a failure,
unless the language used is in your portfolio, in which case see above.
Any text-based code generator outside of your ecosystem's normal build tools is a failure.
And any of the above failures will come bite you in the end, preventing the refactoring
of your code or of your team when you need it most.

Yet “failure” does not mean you should never choose to do it — indeed
the reason to choose one such failure is that
not failing that way would lead to an even bigger failure:
software that can’t be written at all, or with terrible performance,
with missing capabilities, lack of support for some target platforms, etc.
Still each decision to violate the principle of sticking to a supported language (or language portfolio)
is a symptom that this language (or portfolio) has failed you.
Repeated failures may be the symptom of your having chosen a bad language (or portfolio) to work with.
If you made a bad decision, it's still time to fix it by adopting a better language (or portfolio).
But then do it right and don't build a concurrent culture:ae
instead adopt the new language for all development going forward (or add it to the portfolio), and
slowly or quickly migrate or phase out past projects as needed.
Sure, keep experimenting with other languages; but the result of the experiment
should be adoption or rejection, not dilution of your ecosystem.

Of course, if you are a company with a large software budget or a programming language researcher,
you may yourself have a non-negligible effect on the rate at which
your language ecosystem may improve your life.
To maximize impact, you may then choose a language that, beside its high existing potential,
is also welcoming to you, and its extent strengths being complementary to those you bring.

If on the other hand, you have a very small budget to help improve a language and its ecosystem,
then you will want to ride the wave of some existing language ecosystem
that will be mostly developed by others.
That is why, for good long term decisions, you need some understanding
of the structure of such ecosystems.

### Life Cycle, Lindy Effect and Corporate Structure

Depending on a company known to often kill its own projects with little warning,
leaving its users orphans, with no recourse, no attempt to either open source the software
nor spin it off and sell it.


-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Common Lisp, Scala, F#, Haskell, OCaml, Clojure, Erlang, Racket, are possibly valid choices, depending on the context; many other languages may or may not qualify. The point at hand isn't to discuss the merits and failures of various existing languages and establish a definitive list of decent languages; there is a changing market and there are many valid reasons why specific people working on a specific project might pick or not pick any given language over given competition.

### Lindy Effect


Buxton index 1994 Dijkstra lecture
https://twitter.com/jimmykoppel/status/1746356718177583317/photo/1
