    Title: Chapter 12: The Timeless Way of Investing in Programming Languages
    Date: 2020-08-31T20:28:35
    Tags: DRAFT, Tools, Programming Language, Long Run, Long Term, Investment, Strategy, In The Large, Principles, Time Preference

My friend Beth and I often disagree on software technology,
and our arguments delight our common friend Ngnghm the anthropologist
(we pronounce her name "Ann").
In return, we often ask Ann how things are done amongst
[Houyhnhnms](http://ngnghm.github.io/blog/2015/08/02/chapter-1-the-way-houyhnhnms-compute/)
(which we pronounce "Hunams").
[Lately](http://ngnghm.github.io/blog/2020/08/10/chapter-11-a-work-horse-and-its-tools/),
we had been arguing about choices of programming languages;
we noticed that humans tended to make short-term picks, with no long-term strategy.
The question then was: what would a long-term strategy look like?
How did Hunams differ from Humans regarding their approach to the issue?
Probably due to my bias in translation, the way the answer came out was in term of *investment*.

<!-- more -->

### Short-term vs long-term language criteria

Whether you evaluate language ecosystems for the short-term, the long-term or anything in between,
has implications on how much weight you will or won't give to various aspects of these ecosystems.
At the extremes, John D. Cook has this polynomial metaphor:
["For the short term, focus on the largest coefficient. For the long term, focus on the largest exponent."](https://twitter.com/AnalysisFact/status/708011191885496320)

The short term costs and benefits of a language involve the distance
between what the ecosystem immediate provides and what are the short-term needs of the programmer.
- What evaluators are readily available? How feature-complete are they? How robust? How well-documented?
  Are they interpreters slowly executing code, or compilers producing fast executables?
  How slowly does the runtime start or does compiler transform programs?
- What libraries are readily available? How feature-complete are they? How robust? How well-documented?
  How well do they cover the domains considered for the task at hand?
- How good is the tooling: compiler optimizations, type-checkers, error messages, editor integration,
  re-formatters, debuggers, linkers, foreign-function interfaces, etc.?
- How vibrant is the community? Are new libraries written, issues fixed, questions answered?
  Is there a large enough a pool of talent from which to readily hire?
- How big or small are the barriers to entry?
  How much intrinsic or incidental complexity are involved in the language's concepts?
  How familiar are the language's syntax and semantics?
  How much amount of boilerplate is required to start writing and testing an application?

Instead, the long term costs and benefits of a language involve very different criteria,
that capture the possibility and difficulties of building and maintaining over time
large code bases with ever more varied and sophisticated features.
- How conducive is the language to writing good quality code?
  Is it easier, more natural and less verbose to write safe and obviously correct code
  or to write unobvious and probably subtly unsafe code?
  How well-defined is the meaning of programs in the language?
  Is the semantics of a program clear at all times to trained practitioners, or
  are there pitfalls and landmines all over the place?
  Is the language core based on a relatively small number of well-defined concepts,
  or is it a based on a large haphazard collection of clunky features that are hard to conceptualized?
- How well does the language deal with division of labor?
  Is there a good module system that enables programmers
  to build programs incrementally in small fragments
  on which they can reason locally along neat interfaces?
  Or do the language's abstractions leak all over the place?
  Is it even possible to express syntactic abstractions at compile-time?
  reflective control abstractions at runtime?
- How well does the language evolve over time?
  Is it easy for programmers to define new extensions themselves, or
  do they have to wait for a blessed few members of a Central Committee to get anything done?
  How active is this Central Committee, and how long will it remain active?
  Are the people in control willing delegate to competent people the parts of the design
  about which they are not personally competent, or do they insist on doing a bad job by themselves?
  Which parts can or cannot, do or don't, evolve without the need for central control?
- Where is the language in its life cycle?
  How long has it existed?
  What is its track record so far and what can we expect from it in the future?
  Has it easily embraced the features that have become important over time?
  Has it been able to shed bad choices from the past
  as better choices became more available or more obvious?
  Has it been able to maintain backward compatibility or a seamless evolution path for its users
  as it evolved?
  Is the community generally competent or incompetent? welcoming or unwelcoming?
  growing or shrinking? getting younger or older?
  improving or degenerating? open to criticism or fanatical?

*From an economic point of view,
in the short term, a language ecosystem is a commodity of which you are merely a consumer.
But in the long run, it is some sunk capital the choice of which polarizes your career,
of which you are a producer as well as a consumer.*

### Circumstantial vs Perennial

Short-term costs and benefits are emminently circumstantial:
is there a library that precisely does most of the task at hand?
are you personally familiar with the language and its ecosystem?
Given an immediate programming goal, there is usually no time for developers
to acquire new skills or to write and debug large libraries.

By contrast, none of the above criteria, and none of the above circumstances matter much
when choosing a language for the long run:
in the long term, all the short-term issues can be addressed at a small fraction
of the overall cost of building and maintaining the software.
Whether in a business, a charity, or an academic career,
over many decades you can afford to pick up the extra skills,
to write the missing software and documentation, to grow the community,
and even to evolve the language itself.
And you can't afford to save a language and its shrinking community
against their inability to face challenges and adapt to the world.
To build lasting software, you need to focus on perennial issues.

Thus, you'll save a considerable amount of time and energy
using a well-architected language that supports simple, well-defined and modular code,
and that furthermore can itself evolve,
compared to using a misdesigned language that introduces complexity, ambiguity and global interferences,
and that moreover cannot evolve to address its issues.

*Economically speaking, you can earn compound interests by investing in a language ecosystem.
In the long run, the earnings dominate any fixed benefits from choosing a language,
and the rate of these earnings is the decisive factor as to which language is best,
though circumstantial factors might be overwhelming in the short to middle term.*

### Language Portfolio

Either as an individual or as a company,
you can make productive use of multiple programming languages.
Why not "just" use the best language for every task at hand, amongst hundreds of possible languages?
Because there are high transaction costs involved in choosing a language,
in changing your practice from one to another, and
in bridging the gap between what an ecosystem provides and what you actually need or are used to.

Gains from growing an ecosystem are cumulative, but only if you stay within the ecosystem.
These gains compound, but only inasmuch as the improvements made using the ecosystem
can be and are applied to improving the ecosystem itself.
Thus, the rate of compounding depends on how effective are the ecosystem's *reflection* principles
that enable metaprogramming within the ecosystem;
but this rate also depends on how much you keep investing in such compounding on the platform,
as opposed to diluting the compounded efforts between multiple redundant platforms
while wasting a good deal of capital on transaction costs from switching.

Thus, you can only afford to master so many languages at once.
You can only memorize how to use so many ecosystems.
What more, every time you switch to another ecosystem,
you lose the improvements you made to the previous ones, the expertise,
the fitness to purpose, the ecosystem-specific capital your sunk into them.

So you want to stick to a single ecosystem, or a small group of complementary languages,
that each cover different enough parts of the spectrum, with good synergy,
so that the benefits of switching are higher than the costs
of reimplementing the missing features in one of the languages you have adopted.



-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

See [Some Architectural Principles for Software Development Teams](https://fare.livejournal.com/171998.html).
"To grow a healthy culture, you must pick a single language that can handle your entire software stack,
from the highest-level aspects to the lowest-level.
Common Lisp, Scala, F#, Haskell, OCaml, Clojure, Erlang, Racket, are possibly valid choices, depending on the context; many other languages may or may not qualify. The point at hand isn't to discuss the merits and failures of various existing languages and establish a definitive list of decent languages; there is a changing market and there are many valid reasons why specific people working on a specific project might pick or not pick any given language over given competition. The point is that you should pick a one language, the best you can find for you to implement your current and future intended tasks; and thereafter all your code should be in your language of choice, with only trivial wrappers and a few performance-critical loops in any other language, plus maybe some code to adapt your IDE to your language and style. Every "script" needed to build your system or hold it together is a failure, whether in bash, zsh, python, perl, ruby or any language except your language of choice. Anything more than a performance-critical loop in C, C++, Java, Assembly or PL/SQL is a failure. Any text-based code generator outside your normal build tools is a failure. All these failures will come bite you in the end, preventing the refactoring of your code and/or your team when you need it most. Yet "failure" does not mean you shouldn't do it — indeed the reason you do it is that not doing it would be a bigger failure; but each decision to violate the principle of sticking to a supported programming language is a symptom that this programming language has failed you. Repeated failures may be the symptom of your having chosen a bad programming language to work with. If you made a bad decision, it's still time to fix it by adopting a better language. But then do it right and don't build a concurrent culture: instead adopt that language for all development going forward, and slowly or quickly migrate or phase out past projects as needed. Sure, keep experimenting with other languages; but the result of the experiment should be adoption or rejection, not dilution of your ecosystem."

Of course, if you are a company with a large software budget or a programming language researcher,
you may yourself have a non-negligible effect on the rate at which
your language ecosystem may improve your life.
To maximize impact, you may then choose a language that, beside its high existing potential,
is also welcoming to you, and its extent strengths being complementary to those you bring.

Choose the most 
